---
layout: post
title:  "Limb/torso impact protection"
---

* table of contents placeholder
{:toc}

# Overview

<!-- | Body part | CE level | -->
<!-- |-----------|----------| -->
<!-- | Knee      | 1        | -->
<!-- | Elbow     | 2        | -->
<!-- | Shoulder  | 2        | -->
<!-- | Hip       | 1        | -->
<!-- | Chest     | 1        | -->
<!-- | Back      | 1        | -->

Here are the limb/torso pads you probably want at different speeds (these
numbers aren't scientific in any way, it's just a vague impression that I have):

| Body parts      | Speed (mph) |
|-----------------|-------------|
| Knee, elbows    | <10         |
| +Chest, hips    | 10-20       |
| +Shoulder, back | >20         |

Skateboard/rollerblade pads provide more protection for smaller impacts, while
motorcycle pads provide more protection for harder impacts. Therefore heavier
people should lean more toward motorcycle pads, while lighter people may find
that skateboard pads work better for them.

Among motorcycle pads, off-road pads with hard shells and the on-road pads in
motorcycle clothing are both mostly good choices, assuming the pads stay in
place. Knees are an exception where hard shell protectors may be significantly
more protective.

At higher speeds it's a good idea to switch to [abrasion resistant motorcycle
clothing]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2021-07-24-abrasion %}) with internal
pads. Not only will this clothing protect you from road rash, it will also hold
the pads in place during a slide.

Shoulders in particular are a weak spot, so I would look for shoulder pads that
exceed the CE level 2 standard.

# What good is a hard shell?

Hard shells don't absorb impacts, but they're included with many pads for a
variety of reasons:

*Abrasion resistance and sliding*: Hard shells can protect against damage from a
punishing brush against asphalt. Since the shells are relatively slippery, they
also make it easier for the pad to stay in place in a fall. These are the
primary reasons why skateboard pads have hard shells.

*Penetration resistance*: Hard shells can also prevent sharp objects from
penetrating through the pad, and distribute their impact across a larger surface
area. This is largely why hard shells are common in off-road gear.

*Impact distribution*: Aside from dulling the impact of sharp objects, hard
shells can strategically distribute impacts across large surface areas and away
from fragile body parts. Helmets and wrist guards use hard shells this way. Some
kneepads, chest, and back protectors also do this.

# Roller sports vs motorcycle standards

Motorcycle protectors are usually CE certified, even though the certification is
only required in Europe. Protectors can be certified as either level 1 or level
2 depending on how well they absorb impacts, with level 2 being the most
protective.

Skateboard and rollerblade pads can also be CE certified, under the EN 14120
"roller sport" standard, though it's less common outside of Europe. They can
also be certified as either level 1 or level 2, with level 2 being tested with
harder impacts. (As of October 2021, I only know of kneepads that meet the level
2 requirements.)

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/K69_aYeRPOA" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

CE roller sports standard:

| Body Part | J (level 1) | J (level 2) | kN |
|-----------|-------------|-------------|----|
| Knee      | 12          | 25          | 6  |
| Elbow     | 6           | 15          | 4  |
| Palm      | 5           | 10          | 3  |

CE motorcycle standard:

| Body Part               | J  | kN (level 1) | kN (level 2) |
|-------------------------|----|--------------|--------------|
| Elbow/Knee/Shoulder/Hip | 50 | 35           | 20           |
| Back                    | 50 | 18           | 9            |
| Chest                   | 50 | 18           | 15           |

# On-road vs off-road motorcycle protectors

People sometimes claim that off-road motorcycle gear is better than on-road gear
for impact protection, but that's not true in general. They're both subject to
the same CE impact standards. Off-road gear often comes with CE level 1 impact
protection, while it's easy to find motorcycle jackets and pants with higher, CE
level 2 protection. Instead, on- and off-road pads are each better for certain
types of impacts, and with lots of variation within each category.

What distinguishes on- and off-road gear is that off-road gear sometimes covers
a larger surface area, and often comes with a hard outer shell. The greater
surface area is good for falling on uneven terrain, and the hard shells prevent
penetration and protect the pads from branches etc.

On the other hand, the benefit of on-road protectors is that the motorcycle
clothing they come in is more likely to hold together in a high-speed crash. A
pad doesn't do much good after it slides out of place.

# notes

## Knee

[Leatt Knee & Shin Guard Dual
Axis](https://leatt.com/us/shop/moto/protection/knee-guards/knee-&-shin-guard-dual-axis-sku-5017010175-W?selected-color=5529)
{: class="popular"}

<!-- I don't see a reason to think EUC knee impacts are worse than motorcycle knee -->
<!-- impacts, so CE level 1 seems OK. -->

Motocross-style knee/shin guards like the Leatt Dual Axis are widely used. Aside
from protecting your knees, they have the added benefit of protecting your shins
from painful knocks against the wheel. This style of knee guard might also be
less likely to slide away during a crash at higher speeds than a
skateboard-style knee pad.

Some use motocross knee braces. My understanding is that these are meant to
prevent your knee from overextending. I'm not sure what to make of these, but
may be useful in some crashes

## Elbow

CE level 1 pads will probably be enough to protect your elbow. However, the
impacts can be transferred from elbow to shoulder, causing shoulder injuries. So
I recommend CE level 2.

## Shoulder

Motorcycle limb protectors are tested with a 5kg weight meant to be similar to
the weight of an arm. That's great for elbow protection, but it's totally
inadequate if you fall with the weight of your torso onto your shoulder. And too
many riders have experienced this personally, leading to bad shoulder injuries.

For that reason I recommend getting basically the highest level of shoulder
impact protection you can get that's compatible with your current gear.

The only protector that I think will reliably protect your shoulders in a crash
like this is airbag vest like the Alpinestars Tech Air. I think it's seriously
worth considering.

It seems to require a certain amount of speed to fall this way, something like
20mph.

## Hip

CE level 1 will do OK.

## Chest/ribs

Rib injuries seem to happen when the wheel yanks sideways causing the rider to
fall on his or her side. Hsiang did this when the wheel caught on a root. Adam U
did this when the wheel twisted due to a pedal clip.

hard shell is a good idea

## Back

Backward falls seem to be less common, and are relatively gentle (an exception
might be if you're riding backwards). CE level 1 should be fine. Actually I'm
not even sure that's necessary-- the uncertified foam pads that come in many
motorcycle jackets might be enough.

# Choosing upgrade armor

(premium pad table)
