---
layout: post
title:  "Impact protection (limbs and torso)"
popular: Leatt Knee & Shin Guard Dual Axis
popular_url: https://leatt.com/us/shop/moto/protection/knee-guards/knee-&-shin-guard-dual-axis-sku-5017010175-W?selected-color=5529
---

* table of contents placeholder
{:toc}

# Overview

Riders often hit knees, elbows, and hips in a fall, so it's a good idea to get
pads for those. Ribs and shoulders are hit less often but those impacts can
result in more severe injuries, so it's a good idea to protect them as well.

There are a bunch of styles of pads available. Skateboard/rollerblade and
motorcycle pads are the most widely used.

Of the two styles, skateboard pads provide more protection for smaller impacts,
while motorcycle pads provide more protection for harder impacts. Therefore
heavier people should lean more toward motorcycle pads, while lighter people may
find that skateboard pads work better for them.

Among motorcycle pads, off-road pads with hard shells and the on-road pads in
motorcycle clothing are both mostly good choices, assuming the pads stay in
place. Knees are an exception where hard shells may be more protective.

At higher speeds it's a good idea to switch to [abrasion resistant motorcycle
clothing]({{ site.baseurl }}{% post_url 2021-07-24-abrasion %}) with internal
pads. Not only will this clothing protect you from road rash, it will also hold
the pads in place during a slide.

# Roller sports vs motorcycle standards

Motorcycle protectors are usually CE certified, even though the certification is
only required in Europe. Skateboard and rollerblade pads can also be CE
certified, under the EN 14120 "roller sport" standard, though it's less common
outside of Europe.

Here's a video demonstrating some of the motorcycle protector testing:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/K69_aYeRPOA" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Both styles of protector can be certified as either level 1 or level 2 depending
on how well they absorb impacts, with level 2 pads providing more
protection. For motorcycle protectors, level 2 pads transmit less force in
response to a test impact. In both tables below, the Joules (J) is the energy of
the test impact, and the kiloNewtons (kN) is the amount of force transmitted to
a sensor under the pad.

| Body Part               | Impact (J) | Level 1 Force (kN) | Level 2 Force (kN) |
|-------------------------|------------|--------------------|--------------------|
| Elbow/Knee/Shoulder/Hip | 50         | 35                 | 20                 |
| Back                    | 50         | 18                 | 9                  |
| Chest                   | 50         | 18                 | 15                 |

For roller sports, level 2 pads transmit the same amount of force in response to
harder impacts. (As of October 2021, I only know of kneepads that meet the level
2 requirements.)

| Body Part | Level 1 Impact (J) | Level 2 Impact (J) | Force (kN) |
|-----------|--------------------|--------------------|------------|
| Knee      | 12                 | 25                 | 6          |
| Elbow     | 6                  | 15                 | 4          |
| Palm      | 5                  | 10                 | 3          |

# On-road vs off-road motorcycle protectors

People sometimes claim that off-road motorcycle gear is better than on-road gear
for impact protection, but that's not true in general. They're both subject to
the same CE impact standards. Off-road gear often comes with CE level 1 impact
protection, while it's easy to find motorcycle jackets and pants with higher, CE
level 2 protection. Instead, on- and off-road pads are each better for certain
types of impacts, and with lots of variation within each category.

What distinguishes on- and off-road gear is that off-road gear sometimes covers
a larger surface area, and often comes with a hard outer shell. The greater
surface area is good for falling on uneven terrain, and the hard shells prevent
penetration and protect the pads from branches etc.

In contrast, on-road protectors are often made of viscoelastic materials that
mold to your body and harden on impact. Ryan from FortNine demonstrates some
viscoelastic pads in this video:

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/hA3ww6Sr5-M" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Aside from comfort, the benefit of on-road protectors is that the motorcycle
clothing they come in is more likely to hold together in a high-speed crash. A
pad doesn't do much good after it slides out of place.

# What good is a hard shell?

Hard shells don't absorb impacts, but they're included with pads for a variety
of reasons:

*Abrasion resistance and sliding.* Hard shells can protect against damage from a
punishing brush against asphalt. Since the shells are relatively slippery, they
also make it easier for the pad to stay in place in a fall. These are the
primary reasons why skateboard pads have hard shells.

*Penetration resistance.* Hard shells can also prevent sharp objects from
penetrating through the pad, and distribute their impact across a larger surface
area. This is why hard shells are common in off-road gear.

*Impact distribution.* Aside from dulling the impact of sharp objects, hard
shells can strategically distribute impacts across large surface areas and away
from fragile body parts. Helmets and wrist guards use hard shells this way. Some
kneepads, chest, and back protectors also do this.

# Body parts

## Elbows and Hips

Skateboard and motorcycle pads are both good options for elbows and hips. Hip
pads usually come in the form of impact shorts or as protectors contained in
motorcycle pants.

## Knees/shins

Kneecaps are one of the more awkward places to hit. Hard shell pads can work
well for knees by redirecting impacts away from kneecaps.

Motocross-style knee/shin guards like the Leatt Dual Axis are widely used. Aside
from protecting your knees, they also protect your shins from painful knocks
against the wheel. This style of knee guard might also be less likely to slide
away during a crash at higher speeds than a smaller skateboard-style knee pad.

Motocross knee braces provide even more protection, at a much higher price. My
understanding is that these are meant to prevent your knees from
overextending. I haven't seen an instance of that on an EUC, so I don't think
these are necessary unless you have pre-existing knee problems.

## Shoulders

Shoulders are a weak spot.

For motorcycle purposes, shoulder protecters are classified as limb protectors
and tested with a 5kg weight meant to be similar to the weight of an
arm. Unfortunately, if you fall onto your shoulder with the weight of your
entire torso, that's not enough protection. Too many riders have crashed this
way, leading to bad shoulder injuries.

For that reason I recommend getting the highest level of shoulder impact
protection that's compatible with your current gear, possibly even doubling up
the pads. The only protector that can reliably protect shoulders in this type of
crash is an airbag vest like the Alpinestars Tech Air. I think it's seriously
worth considering.

It seems like it usually requires a certain amount of speed to fall this way,
something like 20mph. But that's not totally clear.

## Chest/ribs

Rib injuries seem to happen when the wheel yanks sideways, causing the rider to
fall on his or her side. Youtuber Hsiang did this when his wheel caught on a
root, and Adam U did it when his wheel twisted due to a pedal clip.

It's not clear exactly how much protection is required to prevent these rib
injuries. I haven't heard of anyone breaking a rib while wearing motorcycle
chest protectors, so maybe that's all that's needed. In any case a hard shell is
a good idea for these pads because the shell spreads impacts across a wide
surface area, and the motorcycle level 2 certification for chest protectors
actually tests the rigidity of the pads for this reason.

## Back

Backward falls seem to be less common and relatively gentle when they occur. So,
although back protectors are popular in motorcycle gear, it's not obvious that
back protection is needed for EUC riders. (An exception might be if you're
riding backwards.)

<!-- # Choosing upgrade armor -->

<!-- premium pad table -->
