---
layout: post
title: "Feet"
---

When it comes to feet, the worry is less about hitting something and more about
the wheel hitting *you*. It's common for a pedal to hit you on the back of the
foot or ankle when your foot accidentally ends up in front of it. And because
the pedal is attached directly to the wheel it can hit with an impressive amount
of force.

For smaller wheels a lot of the damage -- mostly minor scrapes -- can be avoided
by wearing high-top shoes. That could mean, for example, Vans Sk8-Hi shoes, or
hiking shoes or boots.

Heavier wheels may call for additional protection. Motorcycle shoes are one
option, since they often come with ankle impact protectors. This diagram from
Shima shows the safety features of one of their shoes, which are typical for
many motorcycle shoes:

![Shima shoe diagram]({{site.baseurl}}/assets/images/shima_shoes.png)

While the specific shoe in this diagram only has an ankle protector on the
outside of the foot, many motorcycle shoes have protectors on both sides. Most
motorcycle shoes are also made with abrasion resistant materials, so that they
aren't shredded by asphalt. [Kinetic D.L.'s Performance-1
shoe](https://kineticdl.com/performance-1/), made specifically for electric
unicycles, has similar safety features.

Touring-style motorcycle boots (as opposed to shoes) will provide more shin and
back-of-leg protection, while still being reasonably comfortable.

Even higher levels of protection can be found in motorcycle racing boots and
motocross boots. However, they look relatively awkward for EUC use, and it's not
clear that the extra protection is needed. Komine's [SK-481 Ankle
Protector](https://japan.webike.net/products/20127444.html) is another option
for lower leg armor. (As of May 2023 I'm the only EUC rider I know of who's
tried it.)
